---
layout: post
title: Free VPN anyone?
lead: Algo VPN, an Open Source, Self-hosted VPN solution
---

# Free VPN anyone? Fast and reliable too, with no logs at all.

It sounds too good to be true, right? Well, there is a slight catch. You will need some technical know-how to set it up, but it is completely free, and you can configure it to keep zero logs. Allow me to introduce you to Algo VPN, a set of scripts that make installing your very own VPN server a breeze. The brilliant minds at [Trail-of-Bits](https://www.trailofbits.com/) created these fantastic tools, and after spending the past year thoroughly examining this technology, I couldn't resist sharing it with all of you.

### Crash course on VPN

"VPN" stands for Virtual Private Network, and it's like your secret passage on the internet. It creates a secure and encrypted tunnel between your device and the internet, acting as a protective shield for your online presence. When you connect to a VPN server, your internet traffic gets routed through that server, making it appear as if you're browsing from a different location. This feature comes in handy when you want to access content that might be restricted in your country. Additionally, a good VPN can safeguard your sensitive information, such as passwords and credit card details, from falling into the wrong hands. It's like having a virtual bodyguard for your data.

</details>

The VPN market is very competitive right now, and that's good news for us consumers. It means we have plenty of options to choose from, including some enticing free ones. But wait a second, you must be extra wary of those free ones. You see, there's an old saying on the internet that goes like this: "If it's free, you're the product." And boy, is that saying spot on! Most free VPNs make money by selling your precious data; this can include anything from your browsing patterns or your email for spam marketing, or even logs of your online activities, which you do not want falling into the wrong hands. Yikes!

### Is there such a thing as free VPN?

Around a year ago, I found myself on a similar quest for the ideal free VPN that offered reliable security and did not steal my data. Despite my diligent search, I couldn't find one that checked all the boxes. Frustrated, one late summer afternoon, I thought to myself, "Enough is enough! I'll build my own VPN, with robust encryption and blazing-fast speeds! How hard can it be?" And so, my journey into the depths of VPN technology began.

I immersed myself knee-deep in the world of encryption algorithms, client software, and hosting servers. Remember when I said how hard could it be, famous last words! However, a glimmer of hope caught my eye: ALGO VPN. It's a free, self-hosted, open-source personal VPN server designed for easy deployment and top-notch security. Sign me up!

Now, as much as I would like to provide full step-by-step instructions to deploy your own VPN server, it wouldn't be practical or comprehensive. I cannot hope to cover every potential issue you might encounter (let's face it, that would be a never-ending story), so I'll instead point you towards the [official documentation](https://github.com/trailofbits/algo). They've got you covered with detailed instructions on how to set it up with different cloud hosting providers.  

You will need some previous knowledge up your sleeve, though. First, you need to be familiar with the terminal on a Linux system. As most of the cloud providers use Linux as their VMs, and Algo is really designed for the Linux OS. Second, you will run into some issues depending on the cloud hosting solution and the type of instance you choose. You will at some point have to google some errors and debug them on your own. Some technical knowledge is therefore essential.

But here's the real secret sauce I'm about to share with you—how to use it for FREE! You see, while the VPN server project itself is open-source, hosting it somewhere requires some financial investment. Unless...

### Cloud Hosting woes

Enter AWS, also known as Amazon Web Services. They offer a free-tier service that allows you to configure a modestly equipped virtual private cloud infrastructure. And guess what? You can use it to learn all about AWS offerings for an entire year, absolutely free! Now, the VPN server doesn't require much computing power or storage. Just keep an eye on your network usage, and voila! You've got yourself a free VPN subscription for a whole year. Detailed steps to configure an AWS server can be found [here](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/creating-your-own-vpn-aws-ricardo-deodutt).

But hold your horses, my friends, we're not stopping there. We're going for a truly free hosting solution. For that, we need to turn our attention to Oracle Cloud Infrastructure ([OCI](https://www.oracle.com/uk/cloud/free/?intcmp=ohp052322ocift)). They have an always-free tier with basic virtual servers that can run the VPN without a hitch. However, before we jump into OCI, I recommend starting with AWS for two reasons.

Firstly, AWS is more popular and widely used, so learning about its offerings and systems can be incredibly valuable down the road. And secondly, OCI is not officially listed as supported by the Algo installation scripts. So, it's a good idea to familiarize yourself with the installation process and enjoy the benefits of AWS while you're at it. The developers over at Algo state that it is designed to *"be easy to set up. That way, you start it when you need it and tear it down before anyone can figure out the service you’re routing your traffic through."* Therefore, I suggest you deploy, tear it down and re-deploy it several times over the year just to learn the nuisances of the installation process. Make the most of your free year, my friends!

Now, here's the scoop on OCI: there are resources available with step-by-step instructions on installing Algo VPN in OCI, for example [this](https://pswalia2u.medium.com/setting-up-personal-wireguard-vpn-on-oracle-cloud-compute-instance-1d90d56d4b8b) and [this](https://kenny.yeoyou.net/it/2020/08/01/set-up-algo-vpn-in-oracle-cloud.html). But fair warning, it might not run as smoothly as you'd hope. You ~~might~~ will encounter a few hiccups along the way, and you will have to do some troubleshooting on your own. But hey, that's all part of the learning experience, right?

But before you embark on this exciting journey, let me share a few valuable tips to keep in mind:

* When setting up your VPN server with cloud hosting providers, you'll be asked to choose the location of your server. This is your chance to decide where you want your virtual presence to be. Feel free to pick a location that suits your preferences. However, unlike with a paid VPN, you won't have the flexibility to hop around different destinations at will. So choose wisely and enjoy your virtual adventures from your chosen location.
* There is no realistic way to update the security protocols and dependencies of the scripts, if there are any major patches that would require you to update the VPN server, you will have to tear it down and deploy an updated version from the GitHub repository.

This post is solely intended to make the readers aware of such technology as it is available. You are encouraged to research this topic on your own and learn more about it before you start any deployment. And one last thing, When it comes to using a VPN, it's crucial to remember that its intended purpose is for educational and legitimate activities. It's essential to respect the law and adhere to ethical guidelines. Engaging in any form of hacking or illegal activities is strictly prohibited and goes against the principles of responsible VPN usage. 
